src/toil_scripts/rnaseq_unc/README.md, before:

## University of California, Santa Cruz Genomics Institute
### Guide: Running UNC Best Practices RNA-seq Pipeline using Toil

This guide attempts to walk the user through running this pipeline from start to finish. If there are any questions
please contact John Vivian (jtvivian@gmail.com). If you find any errors or corrections please feel free to make a 
pull request.  Feedback of any kind is appreciated.

## Overview
This pipeline accepts a sample.tar file (either by URL or locally) that contains RNA-seq fq.gz data files.  It assumes
that every fastq file has either **R1** or **R2** in the file name.  If there are several fastq files in the tarfile, 
(typically in the context of sequencing lanes), they will be concatenated together into one **R1.fq.gz** and 
one **R2.fq.gz** file.

This pipeline produces a tarball (tar.gz) file for a given sample that contains:

    Gene & isoform: counts, TPM, FPKM, and raw counts.
    Exon quantification
    Directory of QC metrics produced by RseqQC
 
The output tarball is *stamped* with the UUID for the sample (e.g. UUID.tar.gz). If a config file is being used, the
UUID is specified on each line per sample, otherwise the UUID is derived from the input file (UUID.tar). 

## Dependencies
This pipeline has been tested on Ubuntu 14.04, but should also run on other unix based systems.  `apt-get` and `pip`
often require `sudo` privilege, so if the below commands fail, try prepending `sudo`.  If you do not have sudo 
privileges you will need to build these tools from source, or bug a sysadmin (they don't mind). 

#### General Dependencies
    1. Python 2.7
    2. Curl         apt-get install curl
    3. Docker       http://docs.docker.com/engine/installation/
    4. Samtools     apt-get install samtools (attempting to remove)
    5. Unzip        apt-get install unzip

#### Python Dependencies
    1. Toil         pip install toil
    2. Boto         pip install boto (optional, only needed if uploading results to S3)


## Getting Started
#### Running a single sample locally
From the BD2KGenomics toil-scripts Github repository, download the following files to the same directory.

    1. toil-scripts/rnaseq-unc/rnaseq_unc_pipeline.py
    2. toil-scripts/rnaseq-unc/launch_unc.sh
    
The bash script `launch_unc.sh` contains all of the parameters required to run this pipeline, although you 
will likely want to modify a couple lines as it assumes everything will be staged from your home directory.

| Parameter                 | Function                                                                                                                              |
|---------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1st argument (unlabelled) | Path to where the jobStore will exist. The jobStore hosts intermediate files during runtime.                                          |
| `--config` OR `--input`   | Path to the config csv file OR the sample.tar.  UUID for the sample is based off the filename before the .tar extension               |
| `--single_end_reads`      | OPTIONAL: Set this flag if the data is non-paired (single end reads)                                                                  |
| `--retryCount`            | OPTIONAL: Number of times a failed job will retried. Useful for non-systemic failures (HTTP requests, etc)                            |
| `--ssec`                  | OPTIONAL: Path to a master key if input files are encrypted in S3                                                                     |
| `--output_dir`            | OPTIONAL: Directory where final output of pipeline will be placed                                                                     |
| `--s3_dir`                | OPTIONAL: S3 "Directory" (bucket + directories)                                                                                       |
| `--workDir`               | OPTIONAL: Location where tmp files will be placed during pipeline run.,If not used, defaults to TMPDIR environment variable.          |
| `--sudo`                  | OPTIONAL: Prepends "sudo" to all docker commands. Necessary if user is not a member of a docker group or does not have root privilege |
| `--restart`               | OPTIONAL: Restarts pipeline after failure, requires presence of an existing jobStore.                                                 |

For users *outside* of the BD2K group at UC Santa Cruz, here is an example of a modified launch script that assumes the 
RNA-seq sample is local, the user has sudo privilege, and wants the output of the rna-seq pipeline locally.

``` shell
#!/usr/bin/env bash
# Ensure directory where jobStore and temp files will go exists.
mkdir -p ${HOME}/toil_mnt
# Execution of pipeline
python rnaseq_unc_pipeline.py \
${HOME}/toil_mnt/jstore \
--retryCount 2 \
--input /path/to/sample.tar \
--output_dir ${HOME}/rnaseq_output \
--workDir ${HOME}/toil_mnt \
--sudo 
```

The first argument (location of the jobStore) and the directory set in `--workDir`, need *plenty* of space to store 
intermediate files during pipeline execution.  Change those parameters to point to the appropriate scratch space or
wherever there exists sufficient storage. The servers I have tested on have 700GB of disk space, which is plenty,
but ultimately this is contingent upon sample size.

#### Running a sample on a batch system (gridEngine, Parasol, etc).
To run your pipeline using the gridEngine batch system, simply add the argument `--batchSystem=gridEngine` to the launch
script.  We currently support Grid Engine, Parasol, and Mesos. 
 
#### Running batches of samples
Instead of using the `--input` argument, use mutually exclusive argument `--config`. This accepts a path to a 
CSV file that **must** follow the format of one sample per line:  UUID,url_to_sample.tar.  Support does not
currently exist for running batches of local samples, as we are making an effort to move most of the data we 
process to cloud storage.

## Advanced: Running the Pipeline on a Distributed Cloud Cluster (using Mesos)
From the BD2KGenomics toil-scripts Github repository, download the following files which will run on the head node.

    1. toil-scripts/rnaseq-unc/rnaseq_unc_pipeline.py
    2. toil-scripts/rnaseq-unc/launch_unc_mesos.sh
    
It is outside the scope of this guide to explain how to setup a distributed cloud cluster.  I recommend taking a 
look at the BD2KGenomics tool: [CGCloud](https://github.com/BD2KGenomics/cgcloud), which can setup a distributed 
cloud cluster using the Mesos batch system in AWS.  Please do not direct questions related to CGCloud or 
setting up a distributed cluster to the author of this pipeline. 

A launch script has been prepared that will run on the head node of the Mesos cluster, scheduling jobs to the worker
nodes that exist within the cluster.

``` shell
#!/usr/bin/env bash
python rnaseq_unc_pipeline.py \
aws:us-west-2:unc_pipeline-run-1 \
--retryCount 3 \
--config toil_rnaseq_config.csv \
--ssec "/home/mesosbox/shared/master.key" \
--output_dir "/home/mesosbox/rnaseq_output" \
--s3_dir "cgl-driver-projects/test/rna-test/" \
--workDir=/var/lib/toil \
--batchSystem="mesos" \
--masterIP=mesos-master:5050 \
--sseKey=/home/mesosbox/shared/master.key \
```

Explanation of additional parameters

| Parameter     | Function                                                                                                                 |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1st argument  | This now points to an AWS jobStore                                                                                       |
| `--batchSystem` | Path to the config csv file OR the sample.tar.  UUID for the sample is based off the filename before the .tar extension. |
| `--masterIP`    | A boilerplate argument that indicates what port to use                                                                   |
| `--sseKey`      | OPTIONAL: Encrypts intermediate files when using cloud jobStore.   

**NOTE:** Every worker node must have all of the required dependencies, as well as the inputs for the arguments 
`--sseKey`, `--ssec`, and `--config` must be on *every* worker node, otherwise as the pipeline runs, jobs wil fail 
as those files will not be found.  If `--s3_dir` is used, a ~/.boto config file with credentials must also be on every
worker.

## Troubleshooting
This section is a work in progress that will be amended as issues arise.
#### Encryption Key Errors
If encryption keys of any type will be used, they must be **exactly** 32-byte keys.

## Additional Information
This pipeline aligns data to the HG19 human reference genome before performing RNA-seq analysis. If you want to align
to a different genome then you will need to look at the help menu `python rnaseq_unc_pipeline.py -h` to see all
of the different inputs that you will need to change.  Support is not offered if you would like to use a different
reference genome. Our group plans on developing a new RNA-seq pipeline for HG38 that uses STAR+RSEM and Kallisto.

Commit message:

Update UNC README.md (resolves #342)
Remove email as point of contact. #324 will add the Toil google group as point of contact in parent README.

src/toil_scripts/rnaseq_unc/README.md, after:

## University of California, Santa Cruz Genomics Institute
### Guide: Running UNC Best Practices RNA-seq Pipeline using Toil

**This pipeline has been deprecated in favor of the CGL RNA-seq pipeline, which is an order of magnitude faster
and produces results that are concordant to this pipeline. If you'd still like to use this pipeline, you will need
to use an earlier version of Toil**

`pip install toil==3.1.6`

This guide attempts to walk the user through running this pipeline from start to finish. 
If you find any errors or corrections please feel free to make a pull request. Feedback of any kind is appreciated.

## Overview
This pipeline accepts a sample.tar file (either by URL or locally) that contains RNA-seq fq.gz data files.  It assumes
that every fastq file has either **R1** or **R2** in the file name.  If there are several fastq files in the tarfile, 
(typically in the context of sequencing lanes), they will be concatenated together into one **R1.fq.gz** and 
one **R2.fq.gz** file.

This pipeline produces a tarball (tar.gz) file for a given sample that contains:

    Gene & isoform: counts, TPM, FPKM, and raw counts.
    Exon quantification
    Directory of QC metrics produced by RseqQC
 
The output tarball is *stamped* with the UUID for the sample (e.g. UUID.tar.gz). If a config file is being used, the
UUID is specified on each line per sample, otherwise the UUID is derived from the input file (UUID.tar). 

## Dependencies
This pipeline has been tested on Ubuntu 14.04, but should also run on other unix based systems.  `apt-get` and `pip`
often require `sudo` privilege, so if the below commands fail, try prepending `sudo`.  If you do not have sudo 
privileges you will need to build these tools from source, or bug a sysadmin (they don't mind). 

#### General Dependencies
    1. Python 2.7
    2. Curl         apt-get install curl
    3. Docker       http://docs.docker.com/engine/installation/
    4. Samtools     apt-get install samtools (attempting to remove)
    5. Unzip        apt-get install unzip

#### Python Dependencies
    1. Toil         pip install toil
    2. Boto         pip install boto (optional, only needed if uploading results to S3)


## Getting Started
#### Running a single sample locally
From the BD2KGenomics toil-scripts Github repository, download the following files to the same directory.

    1. toil-scripts/rnaseq-unc/rnaseq_unc_pipeline.py
    2. toil-scripts/rnaseq-unc/launch_unc.sh
    
The bash script `launch_unc.sh` contains all of the parameters required to run this pipeline, although you 
will likely want to modify a couple lines as it assumes everything will be staged from your home directory.

| Parameter                 | Function                                                                                                                              |
|---------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1st argument (unlabelled) | Path to where the jobStore will exist. The jobStore hosts intermediate files during runtime.                                          |
| `--config` OR `--input`   | Path to the config csv file OR the sample.tar.  UUID for the sample is based off the filename before the .tar extension               |
| `--single_end_reads`      | OPTIONAL: Set this flag if the data is non-paired (single end reads)                                                                  |
| `--retryCount`            | OPTIONAL: Number of times a failed job will retried. Useful for non-systemic failures (HTTP requests, etc)                            |
| `--ssec`                  | OPTIONAL: Path to a master key if input files are encrypted in S3                                                                     |
| `--output_dir`            | OPTIONAL: Directory where final output of pipeline will be placed                                                                     |
| `--s3_dir`                | OPTIONAL: S3 "Directory" (bucket + directories)                                                                                       |
| `--workDir`               | OPTIONAL: Location where tmp files will be placed during pipeline run.,If not used, defaults to TMPDIR environment variable.          |
| `--sudo`                  | OPTIONAL: Prepends "sudo" to all docker commands. Necessary if user is not a member of a docker group or does not have root privilege |
| `--restart`               | OPTIONAL: Restarts pipeline after failure, requires presence of an existing jobStore.                                                 |

For users *outside* of the BD2K group at UC Santa Cruz, here is an example of a modified launch script that assumes the 
RNA-seq sample is local, the user has sudo privilege, and wants the output of the rna-seq pipeline locally.

``` shell
#!/usr/bin/env bash
# Ensure directory where jobStore and temp files will go exists.
mkdir -p ${HOME}/toil_mnt
# Execution of pipeline
python rnaseq_unc_pipeline.py \
${HOME}/toil_mnt/jstore \
--retryCount 2 \
--input /path/to/sample.tar \
--output_dir ${HOME}/rnaseq_output \
--workDir ${HOME}/toil_mnt \
--sudo 
```

The first argument (location of the jobStore) and the directory set in `--workDir`, need *plenty* of space to store 
intermediate files during pipeline execution.  Change those parameters to point to the appropriate scratch space or
wherever there exists sufficient storage. The servers I have tested on have 700GB of disk space, which is plenty,
but ultimately this is contingent upon sample size.

#### Running a sample on a batch system (gridEngine, Parasol, etc).
To run your pipeline using the gridEngine batch system, simply add the argument `--batchSystem=gridEngine` to the launch
script.  We currently support Grid Engine, Parasol, and Mesos. 
 
#### Running batches of samples
Instead of using the `--input` argument, use mutually exclusive argument `--config`. This accepts a path to a 
CSV file that **must** follow the format of one sample per line:  UUID,url_to_sample.tar.  Support does not
currently exist for running batches of local samples, as we are making an effort to move most of the data we 
process to cloud storage.

## Advanced: Running the Pipeline on a Distributed Cloud Cluster (using Mesos)
From the BD2KGenomics toil-scripts Github repository, download the following files which will run on the head node.

    1. toil-scripts/rnaseq-unc/rnaseq_unc_pipeline.py
    2. toil-scripts/rnaseq-unc/launch_unc_mesos.sh
    
It is outside the scope of this guide to explain how to setup a distributed cloud cluster.  I recommend taking a 
look at the BD2KGenomics tool: [CGCloud](https://github.com/BD2KGenomics/cgcloud), which can setup a distributed 
cloud cluster using the Mesos batch system in AWS.  Please do not direct questions related to CGCloud or 
setting up a distributed cluster to the author of this pipeline. 

A launch script has been prepared that will run on the head node of the Mesos cluster, scheduling jobs to the worker
nodes that exist within the cluster.

``` shell
#!/usr/bin/env bash
python rnaseq_unc_pipeline.py \
aws:us-west-2:unc_pipeline-run-1 \
--retryCount 3 \
--config toil_rnaseq_config.csv \
--ssec "/home/mesosbox/shared/master.key" \
--output_dir "/home/mesosbox/rnaseq_output" \
--s3_dir "cgl-driver-projects/test/rna-test/" \
--workDir=/var/lib/toil \
--batchSystem="mesos" \
--masterIP=mesos-master:5050 \
--sseKey=/home/mesosbox/shared/master.key \
```

Explanation of additional parameters

| Parameter     | Function                                                                                                                 |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1st argument  | This now points to an AWS jobStore                                                                                       |
| `--batchSystem` | Path to the config csv file OR the sample.tar.  UUID for the sample is based off the filename before the .tar extension. |
| `--masterIP`    | A boilerplate argument that indicates what port to use                                                                   |
| `--sseKey`      | OPTIONAL: Encrypts intermediate files when using cloud jobStore.   

**NOTE:** Every worker node must have all of the required dependencies, as well as the inputs for the arguments 
`--sseKey`, `--ssec`, and `--config` must be on *every* worker node, otherwise as the pipeline runs, jobs wil fail 
as those files will not be found.  If `--s3_dir` is used, a ~/.boto config file with credentials must also be on every
worker.

## Troubleshooting
This section is a work in progress that will be amended as issues arise.
#### Encryption Key Errors
If encryption keys of any type will be used, they must be **exactly** 32-byte keys.

## Additional Information
This pipeline aligns data to the HG19 human reference genome before performing RNA-seq analysis. If you want to align
to a different genome then you will need to look at the help menu `python rnaseq_unc_pipeline.py -h` to see all
of the different inputs that you will need to change.  Support is not offered if you would like to use a different
reference genome. Our group plans on developing a new RNA-seq pipeline for HG38 that uses STAR+RSEM and Kallisto.
