src/toil_scripts/exome_variant_pipeline/README.md, before:

## University of California, Santa Cruz Genomics Institute
### Guide: Running the CGL Exome Pipeline using Toil

This guide attempts to walk the user through running this pipeline from start to finish. If there are any questions
please contact John Vivian (jtvivian@gmail.com). If you find any errors or corrections please feel free to make a 
pull request.  Feedback of any kind is appreciated.

## Overview

A pair of Tumor/Normal exome BAMs are preprocessed (GATK), indels are found (Pindel), and variants are
called with two mutation callers (MuTect and MuSe).  This pipeline is modular — any part of the 
pipeline can be run on it's own. If preprocessing is selected, it will always occur before any of the other tools.

This pipeline produces a tarball (tar.gz) file for a given sample that contains:

    MuTect: Mutect.vcf, Mutect.cov, Mutect.out
    Pindel: 
    MuSe: Muse.vcf

The output tarball is *stamped* with the UUID for the sample (e.g. UUID.tar.gz). 

## Installation

Toil-scripts is now pip installable! `pip install toil-scripts` for a toil-stable version 
or `pip install --pre toil-scripts` for cutting edge development version.

Type: `toil-exome` to get basic help menu and instructions

## Dependencies

This pipeline has been tested on Ubuntu 14.04, but should also run on other unix based systems.  `apt-get` and `pip`
often require `sudo` privilege, so if the below commands fail, try prepending `sudo`.  If you do not have `sudo` 
privileges you will need to build these tools from source, or bug a sysadmin about how to get them (they don't mind). 

#### General Dependencies

    1. Python 2.7
    2. Curl         apt-get install curl
    3. Docker       http://docs.docker.com/engine/installation/

#### Python Dependencies

    1. Toil         pip install toil
    2. S3AM         pip install --pre s3am (optional, needed for uploading output to S3)

## Inputs

The CGL exome pipeline requires input files in order to run. These files are hosted on Synapse and can 
be downloaded after creating an account which takes about 1 minute and is free. 

* Register for a [Synapse account](https://www.synapse.org/#!RegisterAccount:0)
* Either download the samples from the [website GUI](https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn5886029) or use the Python API
* `pip install synapseclient`
* `python`
    * `import synapseclient`
    * `syn = synapseclient.Synapse()`
    * `syn.login('foo@bar.com', 'password')`
    * Get the Reference Genome (3 G)
        * `syn.get('syn6128232', downloadLocation='.')`
    * Get the Phase VCF (0.3 G)
        * `syn.get('syn6128233', downloadLocation='.')`
    * Get the Mills VCF (0.1 G)
        * `syn.get('syn6128236', downloadLocation='.')`
    * Get the DBSNP VCF (10 G)
        * `syn.get('syn6128237', downloadLocation='.')`
    * Get the Cosmic VCF (0.01 G)
        * `syn.get('syn6128235', downloadLocation='.')`


## General Usage
 
1. Type `toil-exome generate` to create an editable manifest and config in the current working directory.
2. Parameterize the pipeline by editing the config.
3. Fill in the manifest with information pertaining to your samples.
4. Type `toil-exome run [jobStore]` to execute the pipeline.

## Example Commands

Run sample(s) locally using the manifest
1. `toil-exome generate`
2. Fill in config and manifest
3. `toil-rnaseq run ./example-jobstore`

Toil options can be appended to `toil-exome run`, for example:
`toil-exome run ./example-jobstore --retryCount=1 --workDir=/data`

For a complete list of Toil options, just type `toil-exome run -h`

Run a variety of samples locally
1. `toil-exome generate-config`
2. Fill in config
3. `toil-exome run ./example-jobstore --retryCount=1 --workDir=/data --samples \
    s3://example-bucket/sample_1.tar file:///full/path/to/sample_2.tar https://sample-depot.com/sample_3.tar`

## Example Config

HG19
```
reference: s3://cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_hg19/hg19.fa                     
phase: s3://cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_hg19/1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf                  
mills: s3://cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_hg19/Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf
dbsnp: s3://cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_hg19/dbsnp_138.hg19.vcf
cosmic: s3://cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_hg19/cosmic.hg19.vcf                 
run-mutect: true        
run-pindel: true        
run-muse: true          
preprocessing: true     
output-dir: /data/my-toil-run          
s3-dir: s3://my-bucket/test/exome
ssec:                   
gtkey:                  
ci-test:
```

B37
```
reference: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_b37/Homo_sapiens_assembly19.fasta
phase: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_b37/1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.fixed.vcf
mills: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_b37/Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.fixed.vcf
dbsnp: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_b37/dbsnp_132_b37.leftAligned.vcf
cosmic: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_b37/b37_cosmic_v54_120711.vcf
run-mutect: true        
run-pindel: true        
run-muse: true          
preprocessing: true     
output-dir:          
s3-dir:                 
ssec:                   
gtkey:                  
ci-test:
```

## Distributed Run

To run on a distributed AWS cluster, see [CGCloud](https://github.com/BD2KGenomics/cgcloud) for instance provisioning, 
then run `toil-exome run aws:us-west-2:example-jobstore-bucket --batchSystem=mesos --mesosMaster mesos-master:5050`
to use the AWS job store and mesos batch system.

Commit message:

Add statement about installing toil-scripts in venv (resolves #BD2KGenomics/cgl-docker-lib#122)

src/toil_scripts/exome_variant_pipeline/README.md, after:

## University of California, Santa Cruz Genomics Institute
### Guide: Running the CGL Exome Pipeline using Toil

This guide attempts to walk the user through running this pipeline from start to finish. If there are any questions
please contact John Vivian (jtvivian@gmail.com). If you find any errors or corrections please feel free to make a 
pull request.  Feedback of any kind is appreciated.

## Overview

A pair of Tumor/Normal exome BAMs are preprocessed (GATK), indels are found (Pindel), and variants are
called with two mutation callers (MuTect and MuSe).  This pipeline is modular — any part of the 
pipeline can be run on it's own. If preprocessing is selected, it will always occur before any of the other tools.

This pipeline produces a tarball (tar.gz) file for a given sample that contains:

    MuTect: Mutect.vcf, Mutect.cov, Mutect.out
    Pindel: 
    MuSe: Muse.vcf

The output tarball is *stamped* with the UUID for the sample (e.g. UUID.tar.gz). 

## Installation

Toil-scripts is now pip installable! `pip install toil-scripts` for a toil-stable version 
or `pip install --pre toil-scripts` for cutting edge development version.

Type: `toil-exome` to get basic help menu and instructions

Our software lead prefers installation of python projects into a virtualenv. 

- `virtualenv --system-site-packages ~/toil-scripts` 
- `source ~/toil-scripts/bin/activate`
- `pip install toil-scripts`

`--system-site-packages` is only needed as a flag if there are dependencies (like Mesos) installed on the system that 
are needed by the pipeline.

## Dependencies

This pipeline has been tested on Ubuntu 14.04, but should also run on other unix based systems.  `apt-get` and `pip`
often require `sudo` privilege, so if the below commands fail, try prepending `sudo`.  If you do not have `sudo` 
privileges you will need to build these tools from source, or bug a sysadmin about how to get them (they don't mind). 

#### General Dependencies

    1. Python 2.7
    2. Curl         apt-get install curl
    3. Docker       http://docs.docker.com/engine/installation/

#### Python Dependencies

    1. Toil         pip install toil
    2. S3AM         pip install --pre s3am (optional, needed for uploading output to S3)

## Inputs

The CGL exome pipeline requires input files in order to run. These files are hosted on Synapse and can 
be downloaded after creating an account which takes about 1 minute and is free. 

* Register for a [Synapse account](https://www.synapse.org/#!RegisterAccount:0)
* Either download the samples from the [website GUI](https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn5886029) or use the Python API
* `pip install synapseclient`
* `python`
    * `import synapseclient`
    * `syn = synapseclient.Synapse()`
    * `syn.login('foo@bar.com', 'password')`
    * Get the Reference Genome (3 G)
        * `syn.get('syn6128232', downloadLocation='.')`
    * Get the Phase VCF (0.3 G)
        * `syn.get('syn6128233', downloadLocation='.')`
    * Get the Mills VCF (0.1 G)
        * `syn.get('syn6128236', downloadLocation='.')`
    * Get the DBSNP VCF (10 G)
        * `syn.get('syn6128237', downloadLocation='.')`
    * Get the Cosmic VCF (0.01 G)
        * `syn.get('syn6128235', downloadLocation='.')`


## General Usage
 
1. Type `toil-exome generate` to create an editable manifest and config in the current working directory.
2. Parameterize the pipeline by editing the config.
3. Fill in the manifest with information pertaining to your samples.
4. Type `toil-exome run [jobStore]` to execute the pipeline.

## Example Commands

Run sample(s) locally using the manifest
1. `toil-exome generate`
2. Fill in config and manifest
3. `toil-rnaseq run ./example-jobstore`

Toil options can be appended to `toil-exome run`, for example:
`toil-exome run ./example-jobstore --retryCount=1 --workDir=/data`

For a complete list of Toil options, just type `toil-exome run -h`

Run a variety of samples locally
1. `toil-exome generate-config`
2. Fill in config
3. `toil-exome run ./example-jobstore --retryCount=1 --workDir=/data --samples \
    s3://example-bucket/sample_1.tar file:///full/path/to/sample_2.tar https://sample-depot.com/sample_3.tar`

## Example Config

HG19
```
reference: s3://cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_hg19/hg19.fa                     
phase: s3://cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_hg19/1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf                  
mills: s3://cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_hg19/Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf
dbsnp: s3://cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_hg19/dbsnp_138.hg19.vcf
cosmic: s3://cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_hg19/cosmic.hg19.vcf                 
run-mutect: true        
run-pindel: true        
run-muse: true          
preprocessing: true     
output-dir: /data/my-toil-run          
s3-dir: s3://my-bucket/test/exome
ssec:                   
gtkey:                  
ci-test:
```

B37
```
reference: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_b37/Homo_sapiens_assembly19.fasta
phase: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_b37/1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.fixed.vcf
mills: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_b37/Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.fixed.vcf
dbsnp: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_b37/dbsnp_132_b37.leftAligned.vcf
cosmic: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cgl-pipeline-inputs/variant_b37/b37_cosmic_v54_120711.vcf
run-mutect: true        
run-pindel: true        
run-muse: true          
preprocessing: true     
output-dir:          
s3-dir:                 
ssec:                   
gtkey:                  
ci-test:
```

## Distributed Run

To run on a distributed AWS cluster, see [CGCloud](https://github.com/BD2KGenomics/cgcloud) for instance provisioning, 
then run `toil-exome run aws:us-west-2:example-jobstore-bucket --batchSystem=mesos --mesosMaster mesos-master:5050`
to use the AWS job store and mesos batch system.
